As software development
has evolved, engineers continue
to learn how to construct programs
that are efficient, easier to maintain,
and scalable. The common solutions
that contribute to building software like this
are called design patterns. Software engineers
have created a set of patterns that all
developers should follow. In this video, you will learn how to explain the importance of design patterns in
object-oriented programming. Design patterns are
reusable solutions to common problems that provide a standardized approach to architectural challenges
in software design. They provide the developer
with a template for how to solve an architectural problem when designing an application. Using a design pattern means
following best practices. Because the pattern is
common among developers, it helps improve how readable the code is, making
maintenance easier. These patterns also make
code run more efficiently. Let's explore a simple example. The singleton pattern is a design pattern that specifies
that a class can have only one instance
and should provide a single point of
access to it that is available from anywhere
in the application. This is useful for
managing shared resources like a configuration manager
or a database connection. Now that we've explored
the singleton pattern, which helps manage the creation
of objects efficiently, let's dive into other
types of design patterns that address different challenges in
software development. Creational patterns specify how developers should create
objects in an application. The pattern focuses on writing
code in a way that creates objects that are suitable to the situation in which
they'll be used. For instance, even
though creating global variables might be
easier and less complex, overusing them could make
an application less secure, consume more memory, and make
code maintenance difficult. Creating a local
variable that exists in a particular scenario and then is destroyed as a better
pattern in general. Another category called
structural patterns deals with how objects are composed and how
classes and objects can be combined to form
larger structures. Developers use these patterns to organize the
relationships between objects and classes
in a way that minimizes the impact of changes. One example of a structural pattern is the adapter pattern. Let's examine how this pattern
works with an example. Suppose an object doesn't
have an interface that is compatible with the
interface of another object. Developers can use
the adapter pattern to enable them to work together. If they later change the
way one object works, they might only need
to update the adapter, not the entire system. This minimizes impact
to the system. For example, let's say you
have an application with a square peg class and
a round hole class. The round hole class expects objects to have a method
for getting a radius, but the square peg class has a method for getting
its width instead. The adapter pattern
can help you write an interface so that these
two objects work together. Now, let's examine
the final category of development patterns
that focuses on how objects interact. Behavioral patterns focus
on defining the rules and methods for how objects and
classes operate together. They establish clear protocols
for how tasks are divided among different parts of the program and how data
flows between them. When developers effectively
apply behavioral patterns, different components
of the system will work together
more efficiently, even as the system
grows or changes. These three categories describe design patterns that
developers should follow in creating software
that's easier to maintain and that runs
more efficiently. But developers might
ignore patterns, so engineers have
created tools to help software developers follow
and enforce design patterns. Modern software
development tools like Visual Studio Code are
equipped with extensions that assist developers
in writing code that aligns with established
design patterns. For example, some extensions
can analyze your code as you write and suggest refactorings that align with common patterns, such as converting
repetitive code blocks into reusable
functions or classes. Visual Studio Code's integrated development
environment can analyze code and detect
deviations from best practices, including the improper
use of patterns. When they detect a deviation, they can alert the developer
so they can make changes. These tools help developers
write code that is consistent and adheres to
the architectural patterns. Using a combination of
tools and practices, developers should continually
work towards writing software that adheres to
accepted design patterns. This will make code easier to maintain and will
help them create powerful systems that can
more easily grow and evolve. In this video, you learned
how to explain the importance of design patterns in
object-oriented programming, including creational,
structural, and behavioral patterns. By applying these patterns, you can write efficient,
maintainable, and scalable code.